The booze and balihoo of prohibition spawned the shadowy and sinister organization known as crime and corporate.
A sprawling empire, it is reputedly ruled by such men as Frank Castello.
In 1950, Senator Estes Kefava challenges Castello and the Underworld.
This is a story of men in crisis.
Death in the streets is the harsh and brutal signature of the 1920s.
For these are the years of prohibition, when bootleggers pile up enormous fortunes making and selling illegal liquor.
And to protect their empires, they recruit small armies of gunmen and killers.
The public is intrigued by the exploits of the bootleggers and their henchmen.
Gangsters become folk heroes like the notorious Tugun Crowley and his 16-year-old sweetheart captured after a day-long gun battle in a crowded city street.
Even the newspapers portray the criminal as a kind of legendary, almost mythological warrior.
A few spectacular arrests fail to stem the flow of bootlegg liquor.
To the underworld, prohibition is a bonanza yielding an estimated $500 million a year.
In 1933, however, prohibition is finally repealed.
The days of bootlegging end, the gangsters who dominated this colorful era are also marked for extinction.
The most glamorous John Dillinger, his career soon ends when he is gunned down by the FBI.
Devonad Dutch Shus, the dandy of the protection rackets, is riddled with bullets by a rival gang.
When Scarface Al Capone is indicted for income tax evasion, the wild and woolly gangster epic comes to an end.
For almost 15 years during prohibition, the bedrock of survival for the gangs was organization.
Now the mainstay of their economy has vanished. They must seek new avenues.
Criminal leaders ban together, forming the syndicate.
The country is divided into territories of bookmaking, vice, narcotics, gambling.
Organized crime becomes so vast and powerful, its arteries of corruption permeate all strut of society.
The estimated return from backdoor gambling rooms and nationwide bookmaking operations reaches the astronomical sun of $20 billion a year.
Even the nickel pinball machine pays off.
I want you to pay for this.
Epee, hey, hey, hey.
That's a bit of a draw. That was right too.
It is in the cities that the cycle of corruption begins.
With the use of a hidden camera, the operation of the numbers game is revealed.
The racket brings an astonishing return.
In New York alone, the income is calculated to be $250 million a year.
The seemingly innocent facade of the Corners' Agarastore serves as an outpost for the criminal syndicate.
It takes only a nickel or dime to play.
The payoff for picking the right three digit number is 600 to 1.
The odds against hitting a number are almost 1,000 to 1.
To protect this golden pipeline from interference, police must be paid to look the other way.
And so, organized crime threatens the very structure of society.
In 1951, one man begins to talk about the sinister mechanisms of organized crime.
He is headed to Estes, Keefala.
I think it should be brought to the attention of the public that the gangster, the modern day gangster,
is quite a different sort of person than they used to be during the 1920s, during the Al Capone days.
Today, they try to put on more respectability.
They have more money.
They dress better. They try to travel in better society and join the clubs.
And try to gain respectability.
But there's still the old racketeer methods present in the exercise of what they do today,
even in many cases when they get into legitimate business.
In many ways, Keefala is exactly the right man to launch a crusade against crime.
Raised amid the rolling green hills of Tennessee, Keefala is an impish child who learns to recite legal quotations
before most of his friends can add a subtract.
A school baseball star, big bill, as he is called, goes on to become a big city lawyer.
But Estes, Keefala, would rather shape the law than practice it.
By 1947, he has engaged in a rough and tumble political battle for a seat in the United States Senate.
He had spent eight years in the House of Representatives, acquired an unobtrusive legislator.
He had effectively become an expert in illegal business combines and administrative corruption.
People respond not to his record, but to the sense of strength, the warmth and sincerity he radiates.
A D.A.J. of 45 in a stunning upset victory, Estes Keefala becomes the junior senator from the state of Tennessee.
As a senator, he decides to launch an unprecedented crusade.
While he was a congressman, Keefala had uncovered evidence of corruption and government,
and he is sure that at its root are the crime syndicates.
He resolves to use the investigative powers of the Senate to crack the syndicates.
He knows this is a brash political move. He might jeopardize his career.
He might be pushing too far, too fast.
But with great tenacity, he persists in his efforts.
It takes this hard-driving senator only a year to be thrust into the spotlight,
as chairman of the Special Senate Committee to investigate organized crime in America.
The Committee, counseled by the brilliant Rudolf Halley, composed of senators Alexander Wiley, Herbidokana, Estes Keefala,
Charles Toby will soon become one of the most publicized in history.
In March 1951, the Keefala Committee is in New York, believed to be the center of the criminal access.
For almost a year, the Committee has carefully gathered information in some thirteen cities.
The American will you state any legitimate occupation?
Keefala has learned that some testimony will be valid, but many times, the questions will be more revealing than the answers.
Keefala has subpoenaed a colorful cast of characters to testify.
All of them he charges are wise in the ways of crime.
All he claims date their association with the syndicate from the time of prohibition.
Jirubik Frank Erickson, a led czar of a $2 billion bookmaking ring.
Dapper Joe Adonis, head of the estimated $250 million policy rackets.
Paul The Wighter Rieker, called the labor boss, specializing in protection.
Jake Greasy-Thum Gusik, the leader of the Midwestern bookmaking ring, valued at $500 million.
Albert Anastasia, notorious leader of murder and corporated.
Maya Lansky, reputed kingpin of the $250 million lottery rackets.
Top Tony Anastasia, waterfront boss.
For the first time through television, the Senate hearings captured the attention of the American public.
Millions of people watch fascinated as the witnesses unveiled the misty workings of the underworld.
You saw Maya Odua? Yes sir.
And when you tell the committee what transpired.
I told the mayor at that time I had promised him the support of the Feynman and I offered him some evidence of that support on the occasion in a form of $10,000.
For most people have never seen a gangster except in a gangster movie.
It is entertainment on a big scale.
I'm sure some questions are not partner. Some may lead or tend to a criminal.
Have you, where did you get this phrase you've been using all the time?
I've heard it on a television news.
One of the witnesses to appear is Virginia Hill Hauser.
She will be questioned about her relationship with the West Coast mobster Ben Siegel known as Bugsy.
If she was friendly with him she must know his acquaintances how they operate.
In her own words Virginia Hill Hauser describes what it's like to be a friend of the underworld.
Get any money from a subdeleau? No.
And did you ever get any money from my own?
I never got money from any of those fellows. None of those fellows.
None of these that I've been reading about and none that I knew they never gave me anything.
The men I was around gave me things were not gangsters or racketeers or whatever you call these other people.
The only time I ever got anything from them was going out and having fun.
It made me a few presence. When I was with Ben he caved for everything.
By Ben you mean Ben Siegel.
And he gave me some money too.
Bought me a house in Florida.
Did you have a patient to make hot cello?
I don't know.
I don't know anything.
I'm afraid I'll win and then they'll say I made more money than I did.
To build the wall of indictment around the criminal syndicate witnesses other than criminals are brought in.
Men like the former mayor of New York William O'Duire and his argument with New Hampshire Senator Charles Toby
spotlight the possibility of criminal influence in government agencies.
I wonder who the bookmakers in Brettonwood support for public office in New Hampshire.
Well I'll tell you one that didn't support. He's talking to you now and you know it.
Well I can tell you Senator don't know who supported you because you sat down here to New York for money to help in the primaries
and for money to help you in your election and you got it and you're dealt now where it came from.
You didn't send down to New York for a single dollar. You called up. I did not.
I'll know. Would you like to go under that? Yes I would.
All right. I challenge you. Well I'm under oath and you're an ozzer.
Well I'll take the oath right now. If you'll give it to Mr. Chairman. I hate a forefusher.
The Keefowler Committee claims that one man appears to control the entire criminal empire, Frank Castello.
As Keefowler he will be our next witness.
March 1951 in Foley Square a flurry of excitement. Frank Castello will testify.
Convicted in 1915 for carrying a concealed weapon. Frank Castello is sentenced to one year in prison.
Never again he vows. Will he be put behind bars?
During prohibition Castello reportedly establishes a gigantic rum running ring.
Resembling a huge corporation there are traffic and distribution departments, a corruption department, specializing in bribes, and a squad of gunmen to squelch ambitious rivals.
After prohibition the slot machine becomes Castello's personal domain. As the King of Slots his estimated return is some $10,000 a day.
It is virtually a nickel and dime empire.
When he allegedly spits in the eye of New York's mayor LaGuardia the little flower launches a personal vendetta to purge New York of what he terms the negative corruption.
Politicians know these slot machines about the meanest device of law it was ever invented. The plan never had a chance.
But LaGuardia's efforts have little effect. Castello is undaunted. He has money, prestige, power. He is big time now. And in city after city from New Orleans to Chicago, from Detroit to Los Angeles.
Frank Castello has created an empire and he is Lord and Master of it all.
Now he must testify before the key father committee. He knows a careless praise, a chance slip of the tongue, could mean disaster, the end of his power. But he is relaxed, confident, unappraised.
Testifying will be only a minor inconvenience, a slight irritation, nothing more. For 35 years the law has been desperately seeking some way to link him with organized crime.
But their efforts have failed. He has remained aloof, lazily laughing at their attempts.
Frank Castello is risen from small time punk to reputed over Lord of crime. Even now on the stand he insists that only his hands be televised.
He has brains, wealth and influential friends. For he mingles with the best people, judges, congressmen, even senators. And it is the possibility of Castello's influencing these people that key father wants to make public.
And your anthem at the Castello, we might have spoken, yes. I imagine we might have a saying start for something you know.
Oh that's not a problem. What would that be saying a few kind words for him? No absolutely not.
For the judgment, you said you were against him? No I didn't, I took no part.
Well what did you talk to Judge McHugh about, with relation to the delegate? Matter. Well I just don't remember but I'm sure that I didn't look to support him and I had no time waste for him or anyone else.
But you might have favored him. I don't know who I might have favored. Well we were talking about Judge Bellatti where I'm from.
Well I couldn't tell you right now who I might have favored. I might have favored. Yes. Well you're on a might of basis but you're talking about a man or Mr. O'Dwara stated at your support.
And I think it's up to you to say whether or not not whether you might have spoken to several leaders about the candidacy of Valenti for Saragate.
I don't think I disagree with Mr. O'Dwara. I don't think he said he made that statement, he could have never made that statement.
He made it. Well I can't help what statement he makes. I'll make it one now.
Keifal the Hammers away at what appears to be an insignificant point. How much money Castello has in a strong box?
He wants to show that Castello has a mass such an enormous fortune that he seems to place no value on the money at his fingertips.
Answer I wouldn't know. Question is impossible that you have over ten thousand dollars in it. Answer I wouldn't know.
Question why would you know how much cash you have in your strong box? Answer because I have no occasion to look.
Question why would you know how much cash you have in your strong box? Answer I wouldn't know what cash I have in my country.
Question do you have one hundred thousand dollars in cash in that strong box? Answer I said I would not know.
Question why did you decide to take out naturalization papers and...
America has given Castello everything but he is totally unprepared for Senator Toby's question.
Why did you want to be an American citizen? Well I, of course, I love this country.
Baring in mind all that you've gained and received in wealth, what have you ever done for your country as a good citizen?
Well I don't know what you claim, what you mean by that.
Well you're looking back over the years. And now, to that time when you became a citizen, I'm in outstanding 20 odd years after that.
You must have in your mind something you've done that you can speak up to your credit as an American citizen if so, what are they?
Paid by tax.
Tax.
Keyfauver has exposed the enormous influence of Frank Castello to the American public.
Often the questions have revealed more than the answers but now the questions are coming too close to home.
Castello knows of his time to stop. Seeding with anger is throat sore and hoarse. Frank Castello has had enough.
I have a question. Hanson questions. So I feel fully well in case of those.
I, Mr. Castello, I wouldn't strain your voice if you just put the mic up a little closer so we can hear.
Met the Castello.
You know, Mr. Jane was a major. You were directed to answer for short while. I think you can answer a few questions this afternoon.
I don't care to answer any questions, Mr. Cezardo.
Well, it's not a matter whether you care to answer them. It's not a matter of...
I don't feel I'm fit to answer any questions today.
You refuse to testify, Father.
Absolutely.
You ask questions, Mr. Halley, and we'll see.
Senator, I want to figure out my health situation. I'm only here as a witness. And I want to protect myself.
When I testify, I want to testify truthfully. And I can't, my mind don't function.
Well, you seem to... your mind seems to be functioning pretty well. You seem to be able to understand things pretty well, Mr. Castello.
Am I defending in the squad room? No. Am I under arrest? No.
I'm under arrest.
All the respect for the sound which I have to look at.
Not for all the respect for them. I'm not going to answer any other question.
You're just... because I'm not under arrest and I'm going to walk out.
Now, I should explain to you exactly what the legal situation is.
You are under the painter. And if, as I assume, the chairman instructs you to remain and answer questions,
you will thereby become guilty of contempt of the Senate committee.
And just to admit it, Mr. Walley, just to admit it, Mr. Stello.
You don't mean that... will you, as ever, resource in our command to see that he's both to contempt and that he's arrested by the United States Senate?
And so, with Castello's defiance, the hearings end.
Too many, the results are inconclusive. A grandstand play.
The nucleus of crime still remains. But Estes Keefala and his committee have produced the most detailed portrait of organized crime in a generation.
I'm sure that you have witnessed the shocking criminal conditions which exist in some parts of the United States.
And also the contemptuous attitude of certain witnesses we have had before us who refuse to testify.
We will make our recommendations to the Federal Congress and we hope to secure the passage of some legislation that will help.
But in this fight against the cartel of crime, it is going to take the all-out effort not only of the federal government but of state and local governments, and especially of the individual citizen.
But I've always felt that when the people knew the facts that they would find a remedy, and that they will do so in this case.
Frank Castello is one of the thousands of young men raised on New York's lower east side.
He has achieved what most of them dreamed of, wealth, influence, power.
But now, in the spring of 1952, the 61-year-old Prime Minister has sentenced to five years in prison for contempt of the Keefala committee.
In the unwritten code of the underworld, he has become tarnished with the stigma of publicity and prison.
No longer will he wield his enormous power.
Later, an unknown assassin will make an unsuccessful attempt on his life.
Because of the Senate crime hearings, Esther's Keefala is catapulted into the national spotlight.
In Congress, he has no longer the unknown junior senator from Tennessee. He has a name, recognition.
The passage of legislation is only the beginning for the law cannot legislate morality.
He knows this is merely the prelude. The real job is yet to be done.
Now, the people must take up the crime.